docs/BugReport/bug-report.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Bug Report
nav_order: 7
permalink: /BugReport
search_exclude: true
---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

# Bug Report

![bug-enemy.gif](../assets/images/bug-enemy.gif)

Below is a list of known bugs and oddities in the game code.
There are definitely more bugs than what is listed here...they just haven't been discovered yet.

## Map boundaries have no collisions

The player can walk off the edge of the map.

![player-walking-off-map.gif](../assets/images/player-walking-off-map.gif)

This is because there is no collision bounds stopping the player from falling.

A possible solution for this is to block the edge of every map with solid tiles, but this would look really ugly and is a band-aid rather than a fix. 
A better solution would be to prevent the player from actually moving off the edge, as if there is an invisible collision wall there. 
It could be as simple as preventing the player's x location from being less than 0, and preventing the player's x2 location from being greater than the map's length in pixels (and ditto for the player's y locatoin and the map's height in pixels).

## Pausing the game works from any screen

When the P key is pressed anywhere in the game, the game's `update` cycle will stop, which essentially halts the game.
Pressing the P key again while the game is paused will unpause the game and the `update` cycle will continue right where it left off. 
When the game is paused, a large "PAUSE" text will appear at the center of the screen, and the background of the screen will be tinted.

The pause game logic is included in the game engine's `GamePanel` class, which is the root of the game loop. This means
that it is active while any screen is loaded, including things like menu screen...which is definitely not ideal.

This is good.
![pause-game-1](../assets/images/pause-game-1.PNG)

This is not good.
![pause-game-2](../assets/images/pause-game-2.PNG)

The reason for this is that I originally made a simple version of this game engine that I later built off of to create this game engine (which can be found [here](https://github.com/a-r-t/Simple-2D-Game-Engine)) that essentially had only one screen, so having the pause functionality be in that "global" space made sense. 
I never fixed it as I scaled the engine up, which is why the pause functionality now works everywhere.

I think the best course of action is moving the pause logic from the `GamePanel` over to something like the `PlayLevelScreen` which handles the running of the actual level. 

## Moving the player with arrow keys doesn't override previous key press properly

If you are holding the key to move the player to the right and then press left while holding the right key down still,
the left key overrides the right key and moves the player left. 
However, if holding the key to move the player to the left and then press the right while holding the left key down still, the let key does not override the right key and player will continue moving left. 
This is inconsistent. 
For a more natural feel in a game that moves a player with keyboard input,
it's generally best to have both keys able to continually override each other.

This is not an arrow key specific thing -- this happens because of the order in which the if statement is checking which key is currently being pressed.
Solving this will require updating the player walking logic to allow the movement keys to override one another.

Commit message:

Some bug fixes, cleanup, and documentation updates (#16)
- Added extra row of tiles to the bottom of the TitleScreenMap in order to put a band-aid over the JFrame size inconsistency bug
- JFrame size inconsistency bug added to documentation
- Updated documentation to include new scripting engine, bug NPC, textbox options, etc.
- Slight updates to various other documentation pages/links where needed
- Changed all sprite fonts using "comic sans" font family to use "arial" isntead because I discovered that it was always using arial anyway as a default since "comic sans" doesn't actually exist (it's referred to as "comic sans ms" on Windows) -- I apparently don't know fonts at all.
- Fixed bug where player wasn't actually center screen due to the calculations for the camera using the player's x/y at the top left corner rather than the midway points (can't believe I never noticed this).
- Fixed bug in Sprite class where the bounds were at times incorrectly applying a scale.
- Rearranged some code for organization purposes, added some comments, and removed some unused imports
- might be a few other tiny things I forgot about...

docs/BugReport/bug-report.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Bug Report
nav_order: 7
permalink: /BugReport
search_exclude: true
---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

# Bug Report

![bug-walk.gif](../assets/images/bug-walk.gif)

Below is a list of known bugs and oddities in the game code.
There are definitely more bugs than what is listed here...they just haven't been discovered yet.

## Map boundaries have no collisions

The player can walk off the edge of the map.

![player-walking-off-map.gif](../assets/images/player-walking-off-map.gif)

This is because there is no collision bounds stopping the player from falling.

A possible solution for this is to block the edge of every map with solid tiles, but this would look really ugly and is a band-aid rather than a fix. 
A better solution would be to prevent the player from actually moving off the edge, as if there is an invisible collision wall there. 
It could be as simple as preventing the player's x location from being less than 0, and preventing the player's x2 location from being greater than the map's length in pixels (and ditto for the player's y locatoin and the map's height in pixels).

## Pausing the game works from any screen

When the P key is pressed anywhere in the game, the game's `update` cycle will stop, which essentially halts the game.
Pressing the P key again while the game is paused will unpause the game and the `update` cycle will continue right where it left off. 
When the game is paused, a large "PAUSE" text will appear at the center of the screen, and the background of the screen will be tinted.

The pause game logic is included in the game engine's `GamePanel` class, which is the root of the game loop. This means
that it is active while any screen is loaded, including things like menu screen...which is definitely not ideal.

This is good.
![pause-game-1](../assets/images/pause-game-1.PNG)

This is not good.
![pause-game-2](../assets/images/pause-game-2.PNG)

The reason for this is that I originally made a simple version of this game engine that I later built off of to create this game engine (which can be found [here](https://github.com/a-r-t/Simple-2D-Game-Engine)) that essentially had only one screen, so having the pause functionality be in that "global" space made sense. 
I never fixed it as I scaled the engine up, which is why the pause functionality now works everywhere.

I think the best course of action is moving the pause logic from the `GamePanel` over to something like the `PlayLevelScreen` which handles the running of the actual level. 

## Moving the player with arrow keys doesn't override previous key press properly

If you are holding the key to move the player to the right and then press left while holding the right key down still, the left key overrides the right key and moves the player left. 
However, if holding the key to move the player to the left and then press the right while holding the left key down still, the let key does not override the right key and player will continue moving left. 
This is inconsistent. 
For a more natural feel in a game that moves a player with keyboard input,
it's generally best to have both keys able to continually override each other.

This is not an arrow key specific thing -- this happens because of the order in which the if statement is checking which key is currently being pressed.
Solving this will require updating the player walking logic to allow the movement keys to override one another.

## JFrame size inconsistency between Windows and MacOS

On MacOS, the JFrame size is larger than it is on Windows.
This is because of the operating system's window styles. 
On MacOS, the window is curved and adds extra space at the bottom in order to achieve this effect.
On Windows, the window is rectangular and does not have this forced extra space.
The Windows window is "correct" in that it is the ideal size that I was aiming for.

I don't think this is solvable as this seems to be happening at the operating system level rather than the Java Swing level, but maybe there's something I'm missing...
